


     It Was the Wrong Time, It Was the Right Time: The 1980 US Presidential Election



				       Alex Davies
					HIST 2680
			       Dr. Julilly Kohler-Hausmann
					14/5/2017


 

The 1980 US presidential election marked a pivotal moment in modern American politics.
Ronald Reagan awoke an ascendant conservatism that reigned for twelve years and influenced
the entirety of today’s American politics on both left and right. Many factors combined to
fuel the Republican Reagan’s triumph over sitting president and Democrat Jimmy Carter.
Prominent among these was the perception of a world on fire, with the communist USSR
pouring fuel on the conflagration. The pressures thus facing Carter made him look weak and
ineffectual as he struggled to manage rapidly evolving crises, widening the gulf in style
between him and Reagan. In addition, popular anger at a sprawling, intrusive government
and a cohort of unemployed grown fat on the national dollar found its hero in Reagan, who
promised to cut government back in line with the Founders’ intentions and return America
to the people. He did this by campaigning on large tax cuts and welfare reform to prevent
the greed of the few stealing from the toil of the many. By promising to give money back
to working families and inspiring a tide of patriotism, Reagan’s revolution defied class
identities and washed over Carter’s four years in office. National Review, the prime
political publication of conservative America had much to say on the 1980 election. This
essay will examine just how NR explored the factors contributing to Reagan’s landslide
victory.

First, the candidates, through the many eyes of National Review across the election year.
President Carter is a frail man, too afraid to do much of anything. Ted Kennedy is just
another dull apple fallen too close to that famous family tree. George HW Bush is a solid
contender who, though eliciting little excitement, is portrayed as eminently competent for
the job. And Reagan is Reagan – the leading man. In the issues examined NR never
disparaged a Republican candidate. However, the magazine’s counterparts on the left
criticised Democratic candidates forcefully and continually.  Conservative commentary is
more centralised than that of liberals – maybe this explains NR’s blinkers.

NR presents Carter as a man out of his depth, too timid and stupid, utterly lacking the
leadership required of a president. With the Iranian revolution, the outbreak of the
Iran-Iraq war, Libya’s growing assertiveness, the Soviets moving into Afghanistan, China
growing more powerful, and Saudi Arabia needing protection for oil imports, the world was
most certainly complicated. It is difficult to imagine how one man could cope with such
varied crises. But NR cut him bare inches of slack, lampooning the man on every foreign
policy issue of the day. Some of these attacks were warranted – NR noted that Carter had
labelled Iran an “island of stability” in the Middle East mere months before the Iranian
revolution and the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war.  Others were not. In the derisive pages
of NR one is hard pressed to find a bright spot in Carter’s foreign policy.

Carter’s inaction was made all the more egregious in the eyes of NR because of the
likelihood that the USSR would exploit any new power vacuum arising from a lack of US
leadership in regions such as post-revolutionary Iran.  Throughout the election year, NR
was constantly reminding its readership of the existential danger the USSR posed to
America. Articles on the USSR playing dirty, funding covert groups, circulating forged
speeches, and violating arms control treaties are frequent fixtures. The gaze is all in
one direction though as NR exhibits an extreme unwillingness to recognise the same actions
conducted by the US in years previous. The city on the hill is little touched by NR. The
communist-focussed security narrative became a major driving force in the election, as we
shall come to see.

NR did not merely consider Carter feckless – they explicitly linked him with communist and
despotic leaders such as “his friend Castro.”  In this way, Carter was painted as actively
undermining US standing in the world. His lack of will to project strength and seeming
willingness to acquiesce to the Soviets – by cutting defence spending, negotiating SALT
II, and refusing to enforce the 1959 Congressional resolution PL86-90 which explicitly
disallowed peace with “Communist imperialism” – looked stark in comparison to Reagan’s
tough talk.  Though Carter tried to claw back some legitimacy in the international realm
by approving increases in defence spending, it was too little too late. 

Such Carter-the-Communist parallels were especially potent among NR’s readership given the
near apocalyptic presentation of communism in the magazine. With thorough hyperbole NR
described the 1980 USSR as a totalitarian state, something it ceased to be after the death
of Joseph Stalin (see Hannah Arendt’s The Origins of Totalitarianism).  Life in the USSR
was continually made out to be significantly worse than in actuality. In the hive mind of
NR capitalism and communism were locked in mortal combat until one must triumph – God help
us if it is not to be the American way. Tales of Soviet dissidents locked up for their
activities can be found throughout the issues as NR portrays the inhumanity of the
communist regime. NR’s anger is palpable – the US was in a death struggle with an evil
ideology but the nation’s leader was appeasing the ravenous machine.  The recency of the
Korean War and the Vietnam War, both notionally fought against the spread of communism, no
doubt provided fertile ground for NR’s overwrought ideas among the general electorate.

Just as they did Carter, NR treated most Americans who hoped for closer détente with the
Soviets as naïve stooges of the left. One NR writer believed that Moscow was seriously
interested in “Soviet armies land[ing] in the disarmed USA,” and that anyone refusing to
take such a threat seriously should be discounted from the public discourse.  Such doom
mongering was rife on the right and played a large part in contrasting Reagan’s message of
strength with Carter’s acts of weakness.

Being the opposition candidate, unencumbered by public office, Reagan had greater room to
manoeuvre. He was able to read national sentiment and shape his message without the
strictures of the American policy making apparatus. Whereas Carter was exposed to
criticism for any perceived failure, Reagan had the luxury of merely commentating from the
armchair of a respected elder statesman. His “peace through strength” could never be
matched by what NR saw as Carter’s inevitable war through weakness.

Chaos overseas intensified already glaring differences in style between Carter, the
mild-mannered, religiously devoted southerner, and Reagan, the charming, womanising
westerner. Reagan was stately where Carter was jumpy. Speaking about the final debate,
Clive Barnes, then Washington Post drama critic, described Carter as “having a certain
terrier quality to his looks – one imagines he bites strangers and other animals.”
Whereas Reagan appeared cool and composed throughout – maybe because he’d been brushing up
on Carter’s planned jabs from a stolen debate briefing book – Carter looked worn and mean.
In the end “Reagan went through Carter like a chainsaw through peanut butter.”  After the
election NR looked back to declare Carter “an interim figure…an aberration” after whom the
inevitable conservative revolution rolled on.  Historical determinism isn’t just for the
Russians, you know.

Much of NR’s commentary in opposition to something, be it Carter, Berkeley students, or
the federal government is arrogant and high handed. While it makes for entertaining
reading in small doses, the hubris detracts from the reality of the argument. Carter was
frequently referred to as Jimmy, thus infantilising a sitting president. NR quoted the
American Motorcyclist as calling Reagan an “Aging Retired Actor.”  Carter was the
“Befuddled Former Peanut Farmer.”  For a magazine considered a staid fixture of the
American right, its tone reaches annoying impertinence on occasion.

In supporting Reagan NR displayed its continued preference for strong, authoritative
leaders. The publication admired Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s defiance of socialist demands
and celebrated Dwight Eisenhower’s presidency, likely the most popular recent Republican
president before Reagan.  Maybe conservatives, with the primacy they place upon the
individual, are more given to following a strong leader? As a fellow Brit pointed out,
“American politics are centred on, and divided around, personalities”.  Having set himself
out as a serious contender with his speech at the 1976 Republican National Convention then
coming from behind to beat the forgettable George HW Bush and drowning Carter, Reagan gave
America a figurehead fitting his ideology, the embodiment of individual success.

Subject to gibes over his management of the international scene and his demeanour, Carter
also faced problems at home. He presided over the 1979 energy crisis and a prolonged
period of inflation. Both he and the nation suffered from a malaise, a “crisis of
confidence” in his words. As on foreign policy, NR lambasted Carter’s efforts to improve
the economy, indicting the president’s attempts to defend the dollar as distracting from
the fact that stagflation was raising the real tax rates Americans paid.  Amid growing
worry about the economic might of a potentially capitalist China, NR pointed to falling
productivity and regulation-choked growth as symptoms of Carter’s failings.   It isn’t
difficult to see the appeal of the deregulatory argument when considering some of the
rules that almost made it onto the statute books – Senator Alan Cranston introduced a bill
mandating that cigarettes and cigars self-extinguish after five minutes if not puffed
upon. 

Carter’s inability to remedy domestic ills became emblematic of a wider sense of
government dysfunction. NR, always a publication preferring smaller government over
larger, was appalled at how bloated government had become. Its writers argued that many
Americans had come to see government as a benevolence, existing to ensure their comfort,
rather than an institution concerned with regulating human affairs and one about which
they should be suspicious. Such sentiment grew out of Democrats’ enlargement of the
government by using new entitlements to win elections.  Now, overzealous regulatory
agencies hamstrung the American economy while legislators became less and less effectual.
NR was glad to see citizens taking politics back into their own hands and the publication
trumpeted the passage of California’s Proposition 13, a popular referendum on
tax-limitation.  More on taxes in a while.

Government programmes were ridiculed and denounced in every issue of NR. Writers argued
that increasingly sticky red tape was gumming up the economy.  Institutions as sensible as
the National Cancer Institute found themselves in the firing line.  Even NR itself was
affected, having to halt publication of the National Review Bulletin as the United States
Postal Service proved too unreliable at delivering small packets of paper.  For William F
Buckley and Co.  democratic capitalism was the only answer to the challenges of tomorrow.

A federal regime of complicated taxation and regulation made running a small business
increasingly difficult. NR trained much of its fire on the IRS, which often bullied and
threatened those it audited if they refused to cooperate.  The IRS further abused its
power by contravening Congressional directions and established judicial precedent. Small
business – that darling of American politics, that descendant of the frontier homesteaders
– was under threat from the government. Heavy handed actions ultimately diminished the
Americans’ willingness to pay taxes – the supply side of the government conundrum.

The demand side also fell under general attack. Social Security came to be viewed by many
workers as nothing more than a government handout system to lazy people, a system that
their toil was subsidising. Government policies that took from the hard working and gave
to those who offered naught back to America became harder to swallow. In response, NR
supported policies such as de-federalising welfare and handing it to the states, Louis
Brandeis’ “laboratories of democracy,” a switch that would certainly lead to curtailment
of benefits for those in stingy states.  In 1976, Reagan laid the foundation for his
revolution by exploiting this anger at the mythical “welfare queen” – a woman living large
on the citizen’s dollar.

Not surprisingly, government’s intrusion into the private lives and dealings of
individuals fuelled support for an aggressive pruning of government’s many branches. Some
of these branches looked rather sickly – rampant inflation and unemployment sent Social
Security into a fiscal crisis in the 1970s.  Tax cuts offered a simple way to choke off
the infected limbs while transfusing energy into the veins of the American economy. Reagan
was to be chief surgeon.

Prior to Reagan, the Republican Party had focussed primarily on the federal deficit and
was determined to minimise US debt. Borne out of a sense among many Americans that debt
was bad – something to be guilty about and get rid of quickly – political platforms
promising fiscal propriety proved popular.  Previous Republican presidents such as Dwight
Eisenhower refused to cut taxes precisely because doing so would increase the deficit.
Indeed, NR blames repeated election losses on the party’s inability to cut taxes when in
power. 

The 1970s tax revolt saw a radical change in positions as politicians realised that
America’s international economic supremacy allowed it to run deficits with little
consequence. The federal government could effectively mint money and pour it into
consumers’ pockets by way of lower taxes while dumping external consequences onto foreign
markets.

This political movement paralleled an intellectual shift towards the monetarism of Milton
Friedman, which placed more focus on the Federal Reserve and less on government finances.
Controlling monetary incentives could be substituted for managing the stuff. With
Keynesian deficits accepted as normal and the growing use of the financial system to
regulate the economy, large tax cuts were possible while retaining important government
functions at full strength. The profligacy of Reagan’s term in office, left unspoken
before the election, exposed just how America could conjure this magic.  Reagan’s
programme was clearly in line with NR’s policy preferences. Instead of being
coddler-in-chief of a beneficent government that held each citizen’s hand through life,
Reagan led a charge against 1960s social impropriety. A new supply side economics was to
be ushered in and slay the stagflation of the previous decade. The republic was shifting
and the GOP was suddenly the party of change.  Reagan’s plans for increased military
spending on technologies such as advanced intercontinental ballistic missiles and a
space-based missile defence system likewise appealed to those Americans who felt that the
country had ceded ground to communist regimes.  “Government is not the solution to our
problem; government is the problem.” Well, with defence policies like Reagan’s the
American government would be a problem for near any country should Washington choose to
make it so.

Both NR and Reagan were proponents of cultural conservatism. NR opposed sex education and
one reader was so incensed as to write in and express her disgust at such a trend, saying
sex education would make “vulgarians” out of the younger generation.   Accusations were
made against “abortionists” of perpetrating a “generation’s Humane Holocaust”.  The fading
of religion in private schools was lamented as tradition crumbled.  Reagan’s stances on
all three of these issues were key to unlocking the religious right for the GOP before
sealing cultural conservatives inside the party. Under Nixon the Republican Party
integrated racial conservatives; under Reagan it integrated religious conservatives. Since
then, evangelical Christians have been among the most reliable Republican voters in the
country. For many Americans in the 1970s, statism had become religion as they placed their
faith in government to create a heaven on Earth.  Only the GOP offered a semblance of
preservation of God-fearing America. Though one could question them on their adherence to
being stewards of the earth thing or their application of the golden rule.

With a stagnant economy and a culture caught between a progressive future and a
conservative past, many American problems would appear to be internal, not the work of
some scheming Russian as some NR writers might have you believe. One writer argued that
America was afflicted by “dropouts,” “philanthropists,” and “intellectualoids” who cannot
“make the grade in an increasingly competitive economic order”.  An “anti-social
individuality” characterised by a refusal to participate in actions for the national
common good is identified as a primary issue with modern American society.  This is odd,
given the Reagan era’s focus on individualism, but maybe that contradiction is precisely
the problem the writer does not realise he is addressing.

It is interesting to consider how Reagan’s background as an actor fits into a popular
desire for conservative culture. He was a prolific actor from 1937 to 1965, an era of
wholesome family films without any of the modern “graphic mutilation of human flesh” and
“sadistic pornography” that today festers throughout the land.  Older voters remembered
Reagan in the role of the handsome leading man, charming and witty. Perhaps this explains
a measure of his appeal to cultural conservatives.

In contrast to glowing memories of Reagan, Carter appeared simply not a sufficiently
forceful leader for the times. His unwillingness to stir up patriotism resulted in
implicit linking of him to the leftists so critical of the US.  Like day to night,
Reagan’s “Morning in America,” presented a scene of national serenity and hope; a prouder
and stronger country. 

Before the coming of Reagan, some NR contributors found nationalism worryingly thin on the
ground among young Americans, particularly college students and, as mentioned, the
intellectual left. One writer argues that students no longer have the nationalistic zeal
of 1937.  But could it be that 1937 marked the high tide for nationalism as the horizon
was swallowed by totalitarianism and the destruction of the individual, both concepts
diametrically opposed to the Founders’ vision? Could it be that the mass killings in
Vietnam – a war the contributor terms “just” because it propped up one potentially
communist domino – altered how Americans consider their country’s use of its immense
potential for force and destruction?  Healthy nationalism provides the common ether within
which citizens go about their lives and thrive simultaneously as one and many.  Blind
nationalism has given us humanity’s greatest atrocities. Unquestioning nationalism of the
sort advocated by this author is a folly that we would all do best to avoid. No polity can
advance unless it is constantly examined, twisted, turned under the microscope of dissent
and scepticism.

For it was a realistic patriotism that fuelled Reagan’s rise, not a nationalism deaf and
blind. He offered a solution to a strange new world by returning to one’s self, one’s
community, and one’s nation. Reagan transcended class by offering the working man the
opportunity to exert his efforts in guarding against communism and the erosion of American
values. The hard left’s assaults on workers who refused socialism – they were said to have
“a feeling of contempt, despair, and disgust about American workers, unions, and leaders”
– drove workers into the arms of conservatism.  We see this same intellectual superiority
complex manifest itself in today’s politics, with the cultural and intellectual elite
marching against the regression of small town America. The former despises the latter; the
latter resents the former. Unlike today, Reagan’s muting of class identity and
amplification of national identity gave worker’s influence over foreign policy – they felt
they had a stake in events, rather than being passive observers. The factory line was the
nebulous of the American psyche.

Margaret Thatcher laid out a similar nationalism when she took office one year prior to
Reagan. NR expressed support for Thatcher’s opposition to EU farm subsidies, strong stance
against the USSR, and willingness to prescribe tough medicine.    It is little wonder that
the two were so enamoured with each other.  As the Reagan-Thatcher strain of politics
evolved, the late 1970s and 1980s saw the growth of a conservative intellectual
establishment in both countries, a development which, whatever your political views, you
should be in favour of.  The bases for dialogue built in the past provide the foundation
for the expression of robust ideas and debates, the confidence of citizens to speak their
mind at its most genuine.

National Review in 1979 and 1980 exposes the contradictions internalised by the GOP over
the late 1970s. Government should stay out of people’s lives but abortion should be
illegal. America must blanket the world in military hardware but taxes must go down.
Examining its output we see a publication grappling with a rapidly shifting political
landscape, trying to form innate beliefs into coherent ideology. As the standard bearer of
a conservatism that has changed dramatically over the past century, National Review’s
debates parallel the development of the modern Republican Party. Today though it seems the
sun has set. It is night and we can barely see or hear each other. We swaddle ourselves in
comfortable beliefs, content with a political dialogue that alternates between a bland
melange and fiery coals. Oh, for another Reagan, another patriotic father to wash away
difference and bind Americans with hope for a new day. But it is not to be. Darkness and
division lie heavy and a publication arrogantly dedicated to propping up a corrupt
philosophy is far from the light this country desperately needs. That is not to say it is
not important. But it is not correct.



