			      ---High Explosive---

“Have you ever watched a cloud pass over a mountain like theatre curtains at
the end of the scene? The sun shines, brightly, if for just a few minutes as
you look out over the crags. Shadows and imperfections on its Mandelbrot face
shimmer in the light. In that moment, time’s hands bend and the numbers fall
from his face. It’s a funny thing – you watch intently with youthful eyes yet
nothing changes. But then something else – a hare upon the ridge or the boat
upon the water.  You look away, and when you return, something, anything, has
changed. You can’t quite put your finger on it. The velvet closes, the reel
sputters, and the shade returns. The mountain fades to contours on a map with a
Gaelic name.”

Ellis shook his head.

The two men sat in a grimy booth beneath a flickering halogen bulb. Its blue
flux washed through closed eyelids, burning incandescent lines onto the few
remaining corneas beneath. Hofmann’s cyberoptics – older models, but still
running about $230,000 and five days of pain – automatically decreased his
vision’s brightness. Ellis’s eyes – more organic than those in most human
skulls lacked such functionality, forcing him to turn his face down from the
light, like a scolded child or a sinner before the cross.

“Well you missed out, Ellis – kids like you, born in the void and fitted with
augmented optics before you could walk, won’t ever see, no, feel, the magic of
moments like that. Fuck logarithmic brightness control and thermal imaging,
these damn eyes don’t let you see a goddamn thing. People used to keep these
experiences in lockets and brooches, in pendants and rings. In time they fell
to the floor of that steamer trunk that holds a man’s life. Out of sight, out
of mind, they remained, ballast that kept him steady in life’s seas. No more.”

Ellis didn’t reply to Hoffmann’s slurred words. Though one optical implant
traced his partner’s haggard face, his other glided over a blonde in a tight
red dress perched at the grimy bar. She was natural, no upgrades, at least none
visible. Ellis liked that. It held a certain allure. The past was a different
country someone had once quoted to him. But so were the pockets of the present
whose maps were locked away, hidden from a man like Ellis.

They cut a strange pair, even – though some might say especially – among the
horde of junkies and peddlers that frequented the Mary Rose. Where Hofmann’s
bulk strained the organic fabrics that wrapped his torso, the synthetics that
Ellis wore clung to his wiry frame. The first man sat hunched over his cup of
whisky, flexing the fingers of his left hand with the metal digits of his
right. His partner stretched languidly on the broken upholstery. Despite the
lancing electric blue above he spent most of his attention scanning the crowd
that seethed through the rabbit’s warren that held the Mary Rose. It was a
motley bunch, almost all of them modified in some way or another. Metal met
flesh in grinding pain, in augments but also in the vicious fights that erupted
most nights under that sickening, maddening blue glow.

Music pounded out of ports above the booth, jagged impulse coursing over dark,
menacing basslines. The walls were red but appeared purple in the light. They
were covered in flickering images, mainly washed up bands in industrial gear
posing like they knew something or dried out prostitutes of every sex and race,
trying to look alluring in ripped clothing that was absurd even by the
standards of the Mary Rose. Beneath heavy boots and metal feet the floor was
decaying vinyl, topped with puddles of 80 proof alcohol and spent matches.

“We should get going, kid,” Hofmann instructed Ellis, who grunted back in
dissent. He was too busy watching the girl in the red dress. Every time he
looked away he felt his lenses spiralling back to her, like water down a drain.
She looked timid, out of her depth. Her eyes slid warily from side to side,
dropping to pick at her fingernails each time they met the black rifts in
someone’s optics. No one wore clothes like that in the Mary Rose, thought
Ellis, not unless they’d stumbled in here by accident. She wouldn’t have looked
out of place on the Upper Levels, maybe comfortable in 63, 64, but definitely
not down here in 18. Yet her lithe arms and tightly wound hair were a magnetic
refuge in the sea of blind eyes and grinding bodies that churned beneath the
blue fire.

Hofmann stood up, draining his canteen with a swig before crushing the thin
metal in his right hand and rapping the table with his left. “C’mon. We’re
leaving.”

Ellis swivelled his other eye onto Hofmann so that his partner knew he had his
attention. “No. You’re leaving.” Then he turned both optics back over to the
blonde at the bar.

Hoffmann followed his gaze and growled something under his breath. “Don’t think
you’re going to get a bloody natural tonight, Ellis. She might be your type but
I doubt you’re hers. I doubt any of us are.” Ellis ignored him. Hoffmann took
two long strides towards the door before turning abruptly back to fix his sight
on Ellis.  “Naturals for naturals, augs for augs. Just like the good book
says,” he cackled.

Behind the twin abyss Ellis’s brain boiled and cracked. He raged against the
unfairness of it all, the rigidity of The Levels. The cup trembled in his hands
as he felt an urge rise in him. His joints locked tight and static seethed
across his senses. Draining the cup he pulled a match from his dwindling book
before striking its head against the phosphoric strip. The chemicals burned and
flared, dancing in the thick air. Ellis watched the flame for a moment,
contemplating himself before snuffing it out with his hand. He slammed the cup
down onto the table where it rolled onto the ripped leather seat and tumbled to
the dirty floor beneath. Taking one last glance at the woman, he tossed the
dead match onto the ground before turning on his heel and pacing out angrily
behind Hoffmann.

