			 ---Allusions and Illusions---

Throughout and since the negotiations on Iran’s nuclear program, the American
right has painted the deal as the spark that will set the world aflame. Former
Minnesota Representative Michelle Bachmann, the one politician who could
out-idiot Sarah Palin, stated, “this [deal] virtually guarantees…a World War
III”.  

Allusions to a future world war aren’t all we’ve heard from conservatives – the
deal also destines us to repeat history. Republican presidential candidate Mike
Huckabee, otherwise known as a “rancid dingleberry” , told us that the agreement
has marched Israel to “the door of the oven”.  Conservative fear mongering is
nothing new, but right now it’s worse than senile Grandpa Hank at Thanksgiving
after the whisky dries up.

Why do Republicans engage in such bellicose and irresponsible rhetoric? Simple,
they dislike our Muslim, anti-American, “magic negro” president.  Political
stances are awfully path dependent. The runaway train that is the Republican
Party cannot hit the brakes on its vitriolic, anti-Democrat joyride.

Conservative outrage is a shockingly simple remedy to a complex problem. Are you
unable to appeal to voters on the basis of fair and reasonable economic
policies? Does the mere mention of your party’s last president stimulate the gag
reflex of most Americans? Well then use good old hatred to bring people round to
your view. The enemy of my enemy, right?

Now that we’ve unlocked one piece of the psychotic right-wing psyche, let’s try
our hand at diagnosing another symptom. Why do Republicans draw parallels
between World War II and the Holocaust and the Iran deal? Now this is a little
more complicated. And by complicated, I mean interesting. Or both. It’s rare
that the right devises any rhetorical strategy more sophisticated than daubing
their dogma in excrement on your living room wall, so let’s make the most of
this prime clinical opportunity.

There is some (perverse) method in their (hysterical) madness. Simply put,
conservative references invoking the Holocaust and World War II are designed to
re-energise their aging political base (which consists of men who wear
Confederate flag tank tops and your creepy, smelly grandma from Arkansas). By
reminding older Republicans of America’s finest hour (the birth of our deity
Ronald Reagan not withstanding), the right hopes to pull the wool over their
cataract filled eyes, distracting them from the poverty of the Party’s position.

WWII will soon fade from living memory but Republicans are determined to get
their rhetorical money’s worth. With demographics working viciously against
them, they need their supporters to get up out of their wheelchairs and
vinyl-covered sofas to raise the flag (no, not the Stars ‘n’ Stripes, the other
one). By reminding Middle America about horrors that happened while many of them
were still in nappies, the GOP hopes to stoke ‘em up into a frenzy fed by
patriotism and the tears of Iranian children.

So what though, isn’t this all just standard politicking, appealing to the base,
yadda yadda? Well yes, but it’s worrying because it is yet more evidence of the
spread of the Republican rage virus into foreign policy. Blathering about how
Obamacare would cost us our jobs, houses, and pickup trucks was irresponsible,
but at least that legislation had some bearing on the daily lives of Americans.
The Iran deal has about as much relevance to everyday events as do Mike
Huckabee’s comments on the marital motivations of Jay Z. 

Drawing these WWII parallels allows Republicans to stand on a political platform
that is utterly detrimental to the lives of ordinary Americans. If they can
energise people by playing on glorious memories of American victory, they can
distract them from the negatives of the flat tax and minimum wage cuts.
Deploying some Iranian smoke and mirrors allows them to continue helping their
big money sponsors, like a group of reverse Robin Hoods.

There was once a state that used very similar tactics of invoking the glory of
the Motherland to blind its people to famine and oppression – the Soviet Union.
American conservatives are playing the same card in a bid to remain relevant. As
Congress debates lifting sanctions (read: certifying themselves sane) I bet we
can expect the rhetoric to soar to the height of a (hypothetical) mushroom cloud
over Tel Aviv.

