“True terror is to wake up one morning and discover that your high school class
is running the country.”
-	Kurt Vonnegut ‘44

In the blissful naiveté of my youth I used to agree with this quote. My
classmates, who couldn’t stand each other long enough to organise prom, would
never be able to file their own taxes, let alone dictate the future of the
nation. And adults seemed so wise and responsible – they might as well have been
a different species to us squabbling whippersnappers. Vonnegut’s blunt
exaggeration had my young self convinced.

Nowadays though, as I struggle with the rocky evolution into my ‘adult’ form,
I’ve realised that grownups are little more than oversized teenagers. Nowhere is
this more evident than in the US Congress. Indeed, compared to the current state
of affairs, to see my high school classmates running the country would be a
marked improvement. Even libertarianism is quite appealing when your government
is run by toddlers.

Nary a week goes by without the Jon Stewarts (bless his departed soul) of this
world decrying the gridlock in Washington or delivering some equally
disheartening exclamation about the state of our legislature. Congress is more
clogged than a frat house toilet. Any sane person, be they Republican, Democrat,
or Trumpocrat (I thought you said sane, Alex), can see that Capitol Hill has
devolved into little more than a heavily marbled version of high school.

Back in the day, politicians ate lunch together, meeting to discuss things that
mattered, like Mortal Kombat and Popeye.  Now, Democrats and Republicans dine in
separate cliques (they call them ‘caucuses’ or ‘parties’). No doubt this is so
that Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi can coordinate next week’s outfits while adding
a drawing of a jowly turtle to Mitch McConnell’s burn page. On Wednesdays we
wear pink, Senator.

It’s not just inter-party immaturity that we should be laughing at and worrying
about. Rand Paul recently labelled fellow Republican Chris Christie as “the king
of bacon”.  To most men that would be a label of pride, yet Rand Paul delivered
the barb as if aiming at an image conscious sixteen year old. Yet more evidence
that politicians, like that kid who pushed your head underwater during swimming
lessons, will stop at nothing to assert their dominance within the pack. 

Not only does their name-calling betray politicians’ childlike behaviour, some
of them even look like high schoolers. I can assure you that John Boehner’s
orange visage would not look out of place at an under-18 disco populated by
teenage girls with pathological addictions to fake tan. Those white, white teeth
are the envy of tweens the world over.

With their cliques, insults, and unnatural complexions, American politicians
have devolved into schoolyard savages. As a soon-to-be adult I’ve come to
realise that Vonnegut was wrong. True terror is to wake up one morning and
realise that your high school class would do a damn sight better job than the
brats currently running the country.
